---
title: >-
  Emerging Concerns with the Generative AI Data Paradigm (and how academic
  research and “public ai” can help)
type: talk
location: UBC NLP
date: '2025-03-18T00:00:00.000Z'
visibility: public
---


Title: Emerging Concerns with the Generative AI Data Paradigm (and how academic research and “public ai” can help)


Abstract: In this talk, I will discuss a number of avenues by which practices in the AI industry, especially the use of data for generative AI, may create economic externalities and moral harms, and potentially turn public opinion against the computing industry. I will argue for ten distinct avenues of harm that are worthy of consideration for both researchers and policymakers. Then, I will discuss how academic research is uniquely positioned to support a public-interest vision of "AI" and highlight some emerging projects.

 

Quick bio: Prof. Nick Vincent is a researcher in human-centered artificial intelligence. Much of his research focuses on understanding how data records -- including works that we produce and logs of our behavior -- provide value to AI systems such as search engines, recommender systems, and new "generative AI" systems, and how the benefits of data-dependent AI might flow back to the public. A key idea motivating his work is that because human activities are upstream of the data contributions that make AI work, organized groups can exert "data leverage" to bargain for larger shares of the profits of AI or for more voice in how AI systems are governed. The overarching goal of this research is to develop frameworks, build tools, and present empirical results that help work towards an ecosystem of highly capable and widely beneficial AI technologies that mitigate -- rather than exacerbate -- inequalities in wealth and power.
